We're talking about the NTFS file system.
And in this module, we're going to talk
about NTFS file creation and deletion.
When a file or directory is created in
NTFS, these are the steps that happened.
A file record is created in
the master file table for that file.
The bitmap for the MFT record is changed
to indicate the record is allocated.
Now that's a bitmap relating to the MFT
is going to show that that file
record within the MFT is allocated.
The record header allocation flag
shows it as an allocated file or
directory, depending on if it's a file or
folder.
The attributes are written
to the FFT file record.
If the data is non resident,
the $Bitmap file is updated
to represent the clusters
allocated to store the data.
So if it's non resident, the $Bitmap file,
that system file we talked about
at the beginning of this course,
will be updated to represent the clusters
are allocated to store the data.
When a file is deleted,
the record header sequence count,
remember we talked about that sequence
byte, that is increased by one.
That happens when the file is deleted.
The record header allocation flag,
we're talking about the file record,
indicates a deleted file or directory.
That's what happens to
the file record in the MFT.
The bitmap for the master file table,
the $MFT bitmap is changed
to show that the file record
within the MFT is now unallocated and
able to be used.
If the file data is non resident,
not residing within the MFT,
the $Bitmap file is updated to
indicate the clusters are unallocated.
The data itself does not become
overwritten until if it's
a resident file,
the master file table entry is reused, or
if it's non resident,
the data is overwritten out on the drive.
We're going to do a walkthrough.
We're going to create a file and
then delete it and
the items we're going to need
are going to be Active Disk Editor,
NTFS VHD, and Windows Explorer.
Okay, the first thing we're
going to need to do for
our walk through is attach our VHD.
So we're going to go to Disk Management.
Then we're going to go to Actions,
Attach VHD.
We're going to navigate out to
where we saved our NTFS VHD.
We're going to select it and hit Open.
Once we're sure we have the right VHD,
we're going to click OK and
the VHD will mount.
Once your virtual hard drive mounts,
note the disk number and the drive letter,
the volume we're going to use for
this walk through is going to be the first
NTFS volume on this drive which
should be your second volume in,
titled NTFS, and
it should be 200 megabytes in size.
So remember the drive letter.
Mine is B but yours could be different.
Then we're going to go ahead and
create a file on that drive.
So bring up your NTFSB
in File Explorer and
I've created a text document
here called Delete Me.txt.
To create a text document,
all you have to do is right click New,
Text Document, then name it Delete Me.txt.
Once you've done that, go ahead and
open it up and put some data in there.
I just wrote,
this is a file that I will delete.
Then we will recover it later.
You can write anything you want in there
but just put some data in there and
then hit File, Save, and
then go ahead and close the file.
Once you've done that, go ahead and
open up Active Disk Editor.
When Active Disk Editor launches
you're going to go to open Disk and
now we're going to go to Volumes
in our selection bar next to Disk.
We're going to select volumes and we're
going to select that NTFS volume again,
mine's B, yours could be different,
and we're going to select open.
Now when it opens up, it's going to take
us to the volume boot record like it
usually does but
we want to browse the file records.
So we're going to select browse file
records right under the Edit button.
And we're going to scroll down and
we're going to find that Delete Me.txt and
we're going to take a look at
its file record for a minute.
It starts with our S Key file, so we know
we're looking at an NTFS file record.
You can see the flags and the flags
indicate that it is a allocated file.
Hexi decimal 0 1 indicates it is
in use and it is not a directory.
So that indicates allocated file.
So we could see that it's allocated,
we could see the attributes,
we could see the data attributes.
We can see that in our case this
is a resident data attribute and
the data is there.
This is a file that I will delete
then we will recover it later.
What I want you to do is note
the sector number we're on.
So go ahead and
write that sector number down.
136 630 is what my
sector number is.
Yours may be different but
just write your sector number down.
Okay, now what we're going to do is we're
going to is we're going to go ahead and
close the volume.
And we're going to close
Active Disk Editor.
We're going to bring up
File Explorer again.
Now we're going to
highlight Delete Me.txt.
We're going to hold down our Shift key.
We're going to right click and
we're going to delete this file.
And it's going to ask you if you're
sure you want to permanently delete it.
And we're going to say yes.
By holding down the shift key,
we're bypassing the recycle bin.
I'll show you it is not
in the recycle bin.
That's not the same file but
it is not in the recycle bin.
There's no Delete Me.txt
in the recycle bin.
Now what we're going to do is
we're going to go ahead and
go to Active Disk Editor.
So we're going to relaunch
Active Disk Editor.
We're going to open disk again.
We're going to select volumes.
We're going to select our NTFS volume
that we were working with before.
We're going to click Open.
Now we're going to, again, go to
Browse File Records right under Edit.
And we're going to scroll through and
we no longer see Delete Me.txt.
It's no longer listed here.
So now we're going to
navigate out to that sector.
So we're going to go go to sector, And
we're going to go ahead and
type in the sector.
And we're going to click OK.
We can see it takes us
out to a file record.
So change your template
to say NTFS MFT Record,
highlight the F in file, right click and
set template position.
Now we can see the offsets
in our file record.
We can see that it's an AASCII file.
We look at the flags now,
the flags have changed.
They're no longer 01,
they're 00 which says it is not
so it's able to be written to and
it is not a directory.
So it is an unallocated
file at this point,
deleted unallocated file.
And we noticed the sequence
byte has changed from
01 to 02 because we deleted it.
So the sequence byte has implemented
by one and the flags have changed.
So in our next module, we're going to talk
about how we would recover that file.
But I just wanted to show you the changes
that will happen in the MFT Record.
Your sequence byte will
increase by one and
your flags will show
that it is unallocated.